Time series data often presents
unique challenges due to its
large volume and temporal
nature.
Therefore, optimizing queries
becomes crucial for maintaining
performance and scalability.
In this video, we'll explore
essential techniques for
efficiently querying time series
data in CrateDB.
To find bottlenecks and
potential optimization
opportunities in your time
series queries, consider using
the EXPLAIN ANALYZE command.
When you prepend EXPLAIN
ANALYZE to your SQL query, CrateDB
not only generates the
execution plan but also runs the
query and captures detailed
runtime statistics.
This includes the time spent in
various operations such as
parsing, planning, and the
actual execution of the query.
For CrateDB, which relies on
Lucene indexes, EXPLAIN ANALYZE
can offer insights into how
queries are executed using
Lucene's indexing mechanisms.
In this example, we illustrate
the time taken to run a SELECT
query where certain conditions
are applied, filtering data
based on temperature.
The time number represents the
query execution time in
milliseconds, while the green
labels represent execution times
for individual operations within
the overall query, such as data
scans, joins, or aggregations.
These granular timings provide
insight into the database's
performance, helping us
understand where optimizations
can be made.
For instance, if a particular
operation is taking longer than
expected, we might consider
indexing strategies or query
rewriting to enhance
performance.
A full table scan, where the
database engine examines every
single row in a table, can lead
to performance issues.
It's a process that is both CPU
and IO intensive and can lead to
inefficient execution when
dealing with large time series
data sets.
For instance, let's consider a
query aimed at calculating the
average temperature over a
two-month period.
Executing it on a non sharded
and non portion table requires a
full table scan.
Using partitioning and sharding
avoids that.
All data needs to be scanned on
the one hand, and the
aggregation can be executed in
parallel on the different shards
and partitions.
Let's look at this example in
practice.
We first need to create a new
table and import weather data.
Now let's create another table
as a partition table based on
time intervals such as monthly
partitions.
By doing this, we enable
CrateDB to quickly return just
the relevant data needed for the
query, bypassing all irrelevant
records.
Let's run the query on both
partitioned and non partitioned
tables and use the EXPLAIN
ANALYZE command to better
understand which partitions have
been queried.
The execution trace of the query
on the non partition table looks
like the following.
Here we can see that one
partition was queried.
We can run the same query on
partition table.
Now, as we inspect the query
plan, we can see that the second
query runs on three partitions
and the total execution time was
reduced significantly.
A correct partitioning approach
streamlines query execution and
significantly reduces the time
and resources required to fetch
the desired data.
With the next example, we are
going to examine the impact of
utilizing indexes on query
performance.
In CrateDB
the query returns the average
temperature for each month and
considers only temperature
records higher than 20 and lower
than -20°.
To examine the execution phases
of this query, we run it with
EXPLAIN ANALYZE.
The query employs the abs()
function in the WHERE clause.
During the query execution, abs()
triggers a generic function
scan.
It doesn't directly benefit from
the indexes on the temperature
column, which leads to a full
table scan.
It means that the abs() function
requires evaluating the absolute
value of the temperature of each
single record, which impacts the
overall query performance.
Changing the query to use direct
comparison operators allows to
use indexes.
By running EXPLAIN ANALYZE we
can observe that CrateDB now
runs multiple queries which
utilize underlying indexes to
quickly locate and retrieve the
relevant temperature records.
This is one example where the
right choice of predicates in
your SQL queries can have a
significant impact on
performance.
The execution trace shows you if
a generic function query is
executed of an index can be
leveraged without evaluating
each individual record.
This has been a very simple
example.
Please check the execution trace
with your own queries.
Similar effects can be achieved,
for example, when sorting data.
Using an index for sorting is
highly beneficial over sorting
in memory.
In CrateDB, an array is a data
type that allows you to store a
sequence of elements of the same
type because they can handle
multiple values in a single
ordered structure.
They are particularly useful for
batch processing and the
efficient representation of data
sets.
In the context of CrateDB,
which is optimized for handling
large scale and time series
data, arrays can be used to
store sequences of measurements
which can significantly reduce
the overall storage footprint.
Let's take a look at an example.
The CREATE table statement for
sensor readings in CrateDB is
set up to store each sensor
reading as an individual record.
It includes a timestamp with a
time zone for when the reading
was taken, a text field for the
sensor ID, a double-precision
floating point number for the
battery level, and a text field
for the battery status.
This typical setup is suitable
for scenarios where the
frequency of data insertions is
relatively low or the storage
and performance costs are not a
primary concern.
However, it can become
inefficient when dealing with
very large data sets as each
sensor reading is stored as a
separate row, which can lead to
a higher storage footprint and
potentially slower query
performance due to the higher
number of rows to process.
To tackle the challenge of
efficiently storing a massive
data set containing 120 million
records which occupy 6 gigabytes
of space, we applied several
optimizations.
We restructured time data to be
modeled as an array.
The time bucket field is
truncated to the day level.
Similarly, the actual sensor
measurements are stored in
arrays.
This means that instead of one
row per measurement, you have
one row per time bucket.
A more aggressive compression
algorithm, for example best
compression, is applied to the
table taking advantage of the
array structures.
Indexes on the array fields are
turned off to reduce the storage
space used by indexes.
By implementing these changes,
the storage requirement was
dramatically reduced from 6
gigabytes to 1.1 gigabytes,
achieving an 80% reduction in
storage space.
This example illustrates how to
leverage the array data type to
reduce storage requirements and
potentially improve query
performance for time series use
cases.
Another vital element of CrateDB's
comprehensive feature set
is the Common Table Expression,
also known as CTE.
CTE serve as a potent instrument
for enhancing the performance
and readability of queries
within CrateDB.
In certain scenarios, such as
those involving intricate
queries that necessitate
numerous filtering and
aggregation steps, or when
there's a need to repeatedly use
a data subset within a single
query, CTE's can provide
performance advantages over
traditional join operations.
Suppose we have 3 tables:
The sales table records each
sale transaction, the sale_items
table details items within each
sale, and the product table
which maintains information on
each product.
Now we want to find the total
quantity sold for a specific
product within a given date
range.
To calculate the total quantity
of the product named gadgets
sold within the date range from
January 1st, 2024 to February
1st, 2024
the query, joins sales,
sale_items and products tables
based on their respective IDs.
Even though this is a perfectly
valid SQL, it may not be the
most efficient strategy. Even
without considering the
complexities of a distributed
system,
parallel processing and disk/memory
options.
There are still many different
possible strategies here.
For instance, Gadget product may
be sold rarely.
We could then start by looking
up its product_id, then locate
all instances of its sales in
the sale_items table, and
finally narrow down those sales
to the specific date range in
January 2024.
If Gadget is a popular product
in a data set covering many
years of sales, starting the
query by selecting all sales
made in January 2024 from the
sales table, then identifying
which of these sales include
Gadget could be a more effective
strategy.
The impact of using a suboptimal
execution plan here could be
significant as we could find
ourselves trying to join
millions and millions of
records.
In our example, we consider the
specific use case where our
product Gadget is a niche item
with infrequent sales.
The modified query we have
constructed using Common Table
Expressions efficiently isolates
the relevant product ID first,
reducing the subsequent search
space to just the sales of this
specific item.
Before checking the
corresponding sales records for
the selected date range in the
relevant_product_ids CTE, we
limit our initial search to the
minimal set of relevant product
entries, avoiding a full scan of
the potentially large sale items
table.
We then focus on the sale
transactions associated with
these product IDs, which is
expected to be a small subset
given the product's rarity, thus
speeding up the process.
Finally, by filtering the sales
data for these specific sale
items, we ensure that we only
consider the sales transactions
that happened within our desired
date range, January 2024.
This stepwise refinement ensures
that each subsequent join
operation deals with the
smallest possible data set,
leading to faster query
performance and more efficient
use of resources.
Overall, CTE's make the query
more readable and easier to
maintain, especially for complex
queries involving multiple
steps.
Furthermore, CTE's can keep the
intermediate results, which can
be beneficial if the same subset
of data is used multiple times
in the query, reducing the
number of scans over the
original table.
Mastering time series query
optimization in CrateDB is
essential for ensuring efficient
data processing.
By integrating the strategies
highlighted in this video,
you'll be well positioned to
achieve optimal performance for
your time series analytics in
CrateDB.